Welcome to the first of
two printing sessions,
printing on Mac OS X and then advanced
printing on Mac OS X this afternoon.
Printing is a very,
very vital part of any operating system,
because you can have the
fanciest graphics and have
the greatest programming
language and frameworks there,
but it don't mean squat if the customers
can't get their results out on paper.
And it must look good, too.
In fact, actually,
it was the combination of,
back in the early days
with the Macintosh,
the combination of the Adobe PostScript,
all this page maker,
and the Macintosh that really
has really kicked off the
desktop publishing revolution.
We need to continue forward in
making printing easier for both the
customers and easier for printer
driver developers and easier for
application developers to implement.
And we think we're taking a good
stride towards that goal with
the release of Mac OS X and the
Tiogo printing architecture.
So to talk about the printing
architecture from both an application
and a driver point of view,
and to go over the architecture
overall this morning,
I'd like to introduce Paul Danbold,
the manager of the print
group at Apple Computer.
Paul?
It's been quite a few years
since Apple had two printing
sessions at this conference.
So what we're going to do in this one,
we're really going to be talking
about what you can and should be doing
with all the latest printing APIs.
And we'll be covering
a couple of new topics.
One's document modal printing,
which you'll see in a moment,
and displaying your
print dialogs as sheets,
and a better way of extending the
print dialog for both application
developers and print driver developers.
That'll take us halfway
through the session,
and then we're going to talk
specifically about Mac OS X printing.
I'll take you through the architecture,
which hasn't changed
a lot since last year,
and I'll be explaining what's
in DP4 and what to expect in
future releases of the OS.
So, here's the situation with
Carbon printing on Mac OS 8 and 9,
for those of you who are
carbonizing your applications.
Your application is up there,
as you can see.
You may have your
handcrafted printing code,
or you may be using a Carbon power
plant or Carbon Mac app.
You're using the APIs in
the Carbon Printing Manager,
which is part of Carbon Lib on 8 and 9.
And the way to think about it
is that the Carbon Printing
Manager in that environment is just
a little bridge between you and the
classic interface to print drivers.
And print drivers do most of the work.
The situation hasn't changed there.
They have the chooser pack
for printer discovery.
They do the page setup
and print dialogues.
They turn Quick Draw into
whatever page description
language the printer supports.
They talk to the printer, etc.
They handle foreground
and background printing.
So, Carbon Printing on 8
and 9 is no different,
really, than it is with the classic
printing system in that the code
that we provide is a thin bridge.
There's the chooser,
and there's print monitor or
desktop printing for spooling.
One of the things, if you've looked at
Carbon Printing on in CarbonLib,
and hopefully many of you have,
you'll see that the header files,
actually there's two now,
or three actually, contain a lot of APIs.
About six times as many as in
the original printing.h file.
And one of the things I'm going
to try to do in this session is
explain why we've got so many APIs.
One of the reasons, the obvious one,
is that we cleaned up a lot of things,
so you now have access to functions
to what we call the page format
and print settings objects,
which replace the old print record,
which you were used to access directly.
We have convenience utilities
or functions to get at.
To insert pic comments and to
do PR general type functions.
But since last year,
we've introduced a parallel set
of APIs which account for almost
half the APIs in those headers,
which take a print session argument.
And we'll be talking about why
we've introduced all those extra
APIs as we get into this session.
So Carbon Printing Manager, as I said,
is a bridge to the classic
printing interface.
The drivers still do most of the work.
It's worth dwelling for a moment
on the third bullet item here.
What we've done in Carbon Printing
is we've provided some APIs which
allow you to do things like get
and set the page orientation,
the page size, the scaling, etc.
Because a lot of applications
actually have a good reason for
wanting to find out what's in the
print record and maybe manipulate it.
It certainly isn't for all applications.
And we had to find a reliable
way of implementing those APIs.
The issue is that different drivers
store their settings in different
parts of the print record and
encode the settings differently.
So a year ago,
I said we were going to take care of
this and relieve you of the chore of
writing a lot of special case code
to deal with different printers.
And I thought we were going
to do this programmatically,
but we've changed our tack here.
And last year,
we started to work on a database
that we're putting into CarbonLib.
And that database will contain
for as large a number of drivers
as we can find information,
basically offsets and
encoding information,
so that when you call PM,
set orientation, for example,
or set scale, or set color mode,
or whatever,
we will be able to execute that reliably
because the printer vendors have provided
us with the information so that we
know where those print drivers store
the information in the print record.
That's a work in progress,
but we're fairly confident
that it's a better solution
than the programmatic one.
And if you happen to be running your
Carbon application on a print driver
and it doesn't behave correctly
when you call some of these calls,
you should let us know.
So here's your same
application running on X.
Of course,
it could be a Cocoa application
as well as a Carbon application,
because everybody calls through
to the same printing APIs.
Underneath those APIs, of course,
is a very different implementation.
And that implementation is
inside the printing frameworks.
There's actually two.
I'll explain that in a moment.
And they're covered by the
Carbon umbrella framework.
What's significantly different is that,
as opposed to print drivers
serving up the print dialogs,
for example,
and generating their spool files
and doing all that hard work,
we're doing a lot of
that now in the system.
So we provide the page
setup and print dialogs.
We generate the spool file.
We send the print job
to the print server,
which is a separate process.
[Transcript missing]
The last thing to mention on
this slide is Print Center,
the application, replaces the chooser,
replaces desktop printing.
It provides the UI for
discovering printers,
for setting up and managing queues.
And it actually loads these modules,
called printer browser modules,
to do connection-specific
printer discovery,
like finding printers.
over an ApiTalk network with MVP,
or going to the NetInfo network
database to find printers that you
may be able to talk to with LPR.
Last year, if you were here last year
for the printing session,
you heard me go on about all
the Carbon printing APIs.
And, tempting as it is to repeat that,
It's better for me just to point
you to the latest documentation.
If you go to this URL, where most of the
Carbon documentation is,
you'll find that all the
printing APIs are pretty
comprehensively documented.
The documentation was
actually updated this week,
so if you are working
off an older version,
you should download the latest.
You'll find in there a pretty
comprehensive explanation of all
the concepts behind Carbon printing,
all the functions, all the type defs,
etc.
And so instead of talking about the APIs,
what I'm going to do is invite
Alan Beck from the printing team to
come up and show you them in action,
and show you printing on X today.
There we go.
So basically what I'm first going
to show you is Print Center app.
It's like Paul said,
it's a replacement for both Chooser
and the desktop print monitor,
or desktop printing stuff we had.
So basically right now we don't,
if you can see here, we don't have any
printers in our work set.
So basically I want to go
and browse for some printers.
So basically I'll first say I'll go
see if I can find any USB printers.
Here's an Epson USB printer that's
connected to our demo machine here.
I'm just going to add that
to our work set and let's see
if we can find another one.
Let's go up to Apple Talk.
Let's see, what do we have here?
We have a couple of LaserJet 4500,
and I'm just going to go ahead
and add that to the workset.
And let's close this.
So here, basically, here's my workset,
something we use as desktop printers.
You can do the same things
that you can before.
Go up to the printers menu.
You can actually go to the queue.
You can stop the queue.
Let's go ahead and stop this queue.
And let's go ahead and make
that one our default printer.
As you can see,
your default printer shows up here.
You can see right now
we're using the old icons.
It would be great as for the
printer module developers to
create these wonderful new 128-bit
wonderful icons to impress our users.
So let's go ahead and close that.
Let's go ahead and quit
out of print center.
We have all of our printers set up.
And let's just go down into simple text.
And here you can see normal
simple text document,
fancy new picture shown.
And let's just go ahead
and bring up page setup.
Here's the page setup dialog.
You can see it takes off of the
panel-based UI of LaserWriter 8.
One thing you should notice is
it is a movable modal dialog now.
You can basically select paper size of
any papers that the printer supports.
We have orientation, you know, portrait,
landscape, and we're also providing a
button for reverse landscape,
as well as scaling.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Actually,
one last thing here is like you can
format for your different printers.
Like here,
it comes up to a default printer.
So if you just click this,
you can go back to the USB printer,
or you can select other,
and it will launch Print Center,
and you'll be able to add more
printers to your work set.
This pop-up menu only shows the printers
that you've added to your work set.
Then let's go ahead and
bring up the print dialog.
Here again, you can basically have,
you can say what you want to print to.
Here again, with the same pop-up,
this is the page setup.
But this is the actual printer
you're going to print to.
We're going to stay to the LaserJet.
The next item down here is Save Settings.
This is what we expect
most users to be doing.
Basically,
it's a save settings of all the
settings that are down in the,
that the user has set.
Printer driver, printer module developers
will come up with their own,
and they will be shown here.
Like, we have like photo glossy,
normal color, normal black and white.
And the user will be able
to save different sets.
You can see here,
they'll be able to come down here and
save what the current settings are.
into a-- it'll be saved for them.
And then those settings will
show up in this popup as well.
So we don't expect many users to be
actually navigating the panes and
setting all the different options.
They will basically do what
they want-- set it once,
save the set, and then just basically
switch between the settings.
Then we go to the popup menu.
Basically the same as
some of the old drivers,
copy some pages, be able to set these,
set the page range.
Another thing we have is we have layout
as a standard feature for all drivers.
So basically any--
Any printer will be able to have this.
You can set your pages per sheet,
the layout direction,
and what type of borders you want.
Another thing we have is this version of
Simple Text uses the old append-diddle
mechanism for extending the dialog.
So basically you will see they
have their own pane and name
the name of the application.
Here we just added two sample ones.
This is basically print selected
text only and include page numbers.
Another thing we have added
for OS X is basically a summary
pane of all the current options
that the user has selected.
So here's basically a
summary of what the user,
all the different panes
that the user has selected,
except for the app pane.
Because we do not know at this point,
because the application uses
the pen diddle mechanism,
we don't know what they have set.
And there is an API to get that.
Let's just go back here and
let's just go ahead and...
Every print dialog has a preview feature.
Basically,
we select preview and it'll do a preview.
What it's doing is saving that
PDF to disk and opening that
PDF file with your preferred
PDF viewer that the user has set.
So here you can see it's,
there's the document,
we said include page number,
so here's the page number at the bottom.
One feature of this is
now that we're in PDF,
or preview,
you can actually go to and save this
PDF file as a document anywhere on your
disk and use it for later processing.
Let's just go ahead and quit out of this.
Now we're back in symbol text.
Let's bring up the print dialog again.
And let's just go ahead
and actually print this.
Let's quit out of this simple text.
We have a new version of a different
version of simple text up here.
Let's just go ahead and open
up this version of simple text.
And here we have,
let's get two windows up.
Let's go ahead and print this.
Let's go ahead and try to print this.
And what you can see now is we
have the print dialog as a sheet.
And so basically
everything is active here,
layout, summary, all that stuff is there.
What's nice about the sheets is you
can go ahead and go over to this
document and try to print it as well.
So you can have two print
dialogs up at the same time.
They are independent of each other.
So basically I will say, you know,
I want, you know, five copies of this.
And let's go to the summary pane of this.
It says five copies here.
And basically, you know,
it's not reflected over here.
It still says one copy.
So they are totally
independent of each other,
and you can print these as you want.
So this version of Simple Text also,
as well as using Sheets,
actually use the new mechanism
for extending the dialog,
which is through a PDE extension,
print dialog extension.
So basically here it's
much more flexible to the,
much more flexible for the developer.
You can get any number
of panes that you want.
You can organize them
in any way you want.
So you can have multiple panes being
added for the user so that it's not
all kind of crammed into one dialog.
Another nice thing about this is
You actually get the summary presented
to the user through the PDE interface.
Another thing that this one has is,
you can see here, let's say we want to
print this to the inkjet,
it goes back to copies and pages,
and here this printer module
actually added its own PDE,
and where it can select print quality.
And that as well is saved in the summary.
You can see that in the summary as well.
Is there anything else?
Pages.
Okay, let's go back to,
let's quit out of this.
Actually, another thing I wanted to show
you is this is a true sheet.
This print dialog is up.
You can't do anything in here,
but this dialog here is purely active,
if you wanted to do that.
Let's go back to the Print Center app.
Let's go ahead and look at this,
see if we can see.
Okay,
here's the document I printed earlier.
This is a picture of the OS desktop.
Let's just go ahead and start this queue.
It should be printing now, if I remember.
Let's see, yes.
It now says it's printing.
In future versions of PrintCenter,
we will be displaying a lot
more user feedback to the user,
you know, in this area up here.
And actually, it's,
the printer is starting to print.
I hear it up here.
And here is the document that I printed.
So although this afternoon we're
going to go into code level details
about how that second version of
Simple Text was able to do what it did,
I'm going to cover briefly the
steps you should take as an
application developer to get to that
level of printing functionality.
We'll start with,
we'll take it in three steps.
The first step many of
you hopefully have done,
and that is to do the
carbonization of your applications.
And if you started with the
APIs that were available back
when CarbonLib 1.0 was released,
for example,
and earlier versions of 10 were released,
you will have done that work,
should be fairly straightforward,
PR open, went to PM begin, etc.
And your application is running on 8, 9,
and 10.
When you do that, the user experience,
as far as saying print dialogs,
is what you saw in the first
version of simple text we showed.
Print dialogs are still modal.
They're sort of modal for
the system on 8 and 9,
and they're modal for
the application on 10.
So, step two is worth talking about
in a little bit more detail.
When Aqua came along,
which I might say was after we designed
the first set of Carbon printing APIs,
we realized we were going to have
to support document model printing.
And we looked at a lot of
different ways in which we could
Implement that and minimize the
overhead to you if you'd already
done the basic carbonization work.
And after a while,
we realized that the best thing
to do was to introduce a parallel
set of APIs and add one new
argument to that parallel set.
And that argument,
which is a printing session object,
enabled us to maintain context between
one document's print session and
another document's print session.
So although I hate to ask anybody to
go back and rework their printing code,
this rework is rather straightforward.
You have to be a little careful to make
sure that you're doing the right thing.
But switching over to the session
APIs will get you to the point
where you can have multiple
print sessions running on 10.
Because ACWA doesn't run on 8 and 9,
as you're probably well aware,
you are limited to one
session on that OS.
You can use the session APIs,
you're just not allowed to create
multiple printing sessions.
So if you do that,
basically you've got the ability to run,
to spool a print job while
another one is being prepared.
So you've got some performance benefits.
But your print dialogs are still modal.
They're not displayed as a sheet.
So you're going to take one more step,
and that step's pretty straightforward.
It involves one new API,
PMSessionUseSheets.
It involves a callback function
that you have to reference from
your call to PMSessionUseSheets.
And when you do that,
basically we'll display the
print dialogs as a sheet for you.
And everything works like
it did in Alan's demo.
We would like you to get
there as soon as you can,
but we understand that if you've
already done the first step of
getting your applications carbonized,
you may want to wait until 10 is
your primary focus before doing that,
because you are going to
have to do a runtime check
before you can use this API.
The other thing that Alan had in the
first version of Simple Text was that
he had Simple Text adding a couple
of controls to the print dialog using
the old append-dittle mechanism.
And if you don't know
what append-dittle is,
you should look at TechNote 1080,
I think it is.
It's been used a long time and will
continue to support it and maintain it
on both 8.9 and 10 with Carbon printing.
It has some significant limitations,
I mean, one of which is that,
especially on 8 and 9
with different drivers,
you don't really have a lot of control
over where your controls get placed.
And two, all your controls just
go into the print dialog.
There's no ability to organize
them into multiple panels.
And there's no way for your controls
to have any idea of what the system,
the printing system's controls are doing,
or what the driver's controls are doing.
So, as Alan mentioned,
we've come up with a better mechanism.
We call them print dialog extensions.
They're plug-ins.
They're based on CF plug-in.
And because
They tie in quite nicely with
document mobile printing and
printing dialogs as sheets.
They are available only for 10.
As I said,
you can use them when your print
dialog is displayed as a sheet.
And the benefits are that, one,
if you have a lot of printing
features that you want to add,
you can organize them
into multiple panels.
The way to think about it
is that you write one PDE,
one plug-in per panel you want
to add to the print dialogs,
or to the page setup dialogs.
So that's good.
One thing that's got incredible
repercussions potentially is that your
controls can override other controls.
We've let applications install
PDEs which override things that we
provide as standard in the system.
You can even override controls
potentially that the printer
driver would serve up.
So you have to be careful about this,
but if, for example,
your application wants to allow
users to type in page numbers or
page range in a different format
than the one that we provide,
then you've got the ability to do that.
And you won't confuse users by
providing two page range controls.
The other thing that we're implementing
is a mechanism to notify your PDE when
a control in another panel has
been changed that affects you.
Of course, you have to be a little
careful about doing that,
but it's a lot more powerful than
what we used to have in the past,
where you might implement, for example,
the reverse page order
control in your print dialog.
The driver may have
done the same control,
and they'll interact with each
other in ways that the user
probably won't appreciate.
If you want to know
exactly how to write PDEs,
you should come to this
afternoon's session,
because I'm not going to
go into code at this time.
To wrap this up though,
the main message for you is if you're
developing a Carbon application
and you've already done the port,
the non-session APIs are
just fine for now.
You'll print on 8, 9, and 10,
but the print dialogs will be modal.
Very soon,
hopefully 10 will be your primary focus,
and that's the time when you should
switch over to the session APIs,
use those.
And a small step beyond that would be
to display your print dialogs as sheets.
And if you're an application
with advanced printing needs,
now's the time to think seriously
about using the plugins instead of
using the append-dittle mechanism.
And that's pretty much it for
the first part of the session to
talk about Carbon printing APIs.
We're now going to switch over to a quick
recap of the printing architecture on X.
If you were here last year,
you saw a diagram that
looked just like this.
And the good news is that
it's still a valid diagram.
We haven't changed our architecture.
We've tweaked a couple of APIs,
but pretty much everything's in place.
We've just written a lot more code.
I'm going to walk you
through this fairly quickly,
and the reason I'm going to do that is
so that I can point out what's in DP4,
and what you can expect
in the first release of X,
and a couple of things that
will unfortunately have to wait
until future releases of the OS.
There's your application
up on the top left,
Carbon or Cocoa.
You're going to be linked against,
well probably against the
Carbon Umbrella Framework,
but you're certainly going to
be linked against the printing
frameworks which are inside that.
And as I said,
print frameworks are responsible
for serving up the UI,
they're responsible for
generating the spool file,
they even talk to print center,
and they replace a lot of the
functionality that old style
classic drivers used to do.
They generate a,
for every time you hit the print button,
they generate a print job.
The print job,
as I talked about last year,
comprises two files.
There's a spool file,
which by default is PDF,
but other spool file
formats are supported.
There's also a job ticket,
which is a metadata
associated with a print job,
which provides a better means
for us to control printing as
the job goes down the pipeline,
and to separate the PDL,
the page description language,
from the printing setting.
things.
So the next step in the pipeline
is this separate process
called the queue manager.
If you're running Process Viewer on 10,
you'll see that it's
called the print server.
And it replaces print monitor
and desktop printing that
you're familiar with on 8 and 9.
It's responsible for managing the queues,
multiple queues for multiple printers.
It's designed for a client-server
architecture to support a client
spooling a job and sending it to
a separate machine to process.
But in DP4,
and unfortunately in the first release,
we're only spooling local queuing.
The design's there,
but the implementation isn't
ready for us to be able to support
true client-server printing.
The job manager is responsible for
processing individual jobs as they
get dequeued by the queue manager.
The job manager is responsible
for page level features.
For printers that don't have
their own ability to do things
like print multiple copies,
it takes care of that.
And it coordinates three threads.
The first one is the converter.
The converter is quite
a clever piece of code.
It's not just a single module.
It contains code that can read
in various full file formats,
and separately code that can
generate different output formats.
The mainstream print path is
when the print job creator uses
the converter to generate from,
say, Quick Draw, a PDF school file.
And when you get down to the
server end of the system,
the converter is used to
convert that PDF into bitmap.
And the converter is built around a lot
of core graphics technology to do that.
But also in the converter is code
ported over from LaserWriter 8.
So, for example,
if your application generated a
school file that contained PostScript,
we would generate an old-style
PIC with PostScript school file.
And by the time the converter
gets to process the job,
it's going to be using
LaserWriter 8 code.
So, you're printing LaserWriter 8-derived
code to turn that into PostScript.
Of course, that seems you're printing
to a PostScript printer.
The printer module is really
the vestige of the old drivers.
It contains all the printer-specific
code in the printing system,
because the OS is taking care
of so much of the functionality.
And it's a printer module that
is responsible for knowing
what sort of format the printer
is capable of receiving,
managing the printer,
returning status up the pipeline,
and error messages up the
pipeline to the client.
And I'll be talking a little bit more
about the printer module in a moment.
The I/O module,
as I mentioned a moment ago,
we've separated I/O from spool file
rendering and that sort of thing.
I/O modules are shared amongst
various types of printers.
We have got
I/O modules for network
protocols and I/O modules for the
Direct Connect protocols like USB.
Last but not least,
we've got the Print Center application,
which you saw in action.
UI isn't final, but it works just fine on
DP4 for discovering printers,
setting up queues,
and picking default printers.
But we're going to be extending
the functionality so that it
becomes a host for printer
configuration and other things.
So you can expect that to evolve
between now and the first release of X.
So that's pretty much the architecture,
and I'm going to switch over here
to show you the Toga system from
the viewpoint of printer vendors,
or the developers of print drivers.
It's a slightly different
perspective because here we're
showing four types of modules which
Printer vendors or driver
developers are going to create,
with an SDK, which we're going to
be releasing next week,
to be able to get their
printers working with Mac OS X.
And we have been collaborating with a lot
of printer vendors over the last year.
If you're in the business and you haven't
been talking to us about your needs,
next week would be a great
time to get in touch with us.
Let's talk about printer modules first.
What do they do?
They're quite simple actually,
or maybe that's just because
they're architected cleverly.
They have a set of functions that
are used to tell the converter
what sort of output data they
want the converter to generate.
They contain, obviously,
codes to know how to format
the data for the printer.
In the case of an inkjet printer,
they'd be banding the data
and compressing it and
inserting engine control codes,
etc.
They also have the smarts to handle
printer status and error messages.
They're called by the job manager.
When a job's being printed,
the job manager will tell the printer
module to print a page or maybe print
a whole document and relay status,
etc.
It's a lot less work to write
a printer module than it was
to write a classic driver,
by a long way.
So what Apple's doing,
and what we've done for DP4,
is we provided the
PostScript printer module,
so we take care of most of
the PostScript printing needs.
We don't have in DP4 full
support for PPD files.
That'll come later.
But Apple is taking on the
responsibility of providing
PostScript printing support in the OS.
And printer vendors
will be using the SDK,
which I mentioned,
to write printer modules
for their printers,
which sort different page
description languages,
like PCL, which you've probably heard of,
Escape P for Epson printers,
the BubbleJet language
for Canon printers,
etc.
So we're looking to those printer
vendors to write printer modules
for those types of products.
Print dialog extensions.
You saw one in Alan's demo.
In just the same way that
applications can add functionality
to the page set and print dialogs,
printer vendors and basically printer
modules can expose their printer-specific
features through these plugins.
So,
not only do you have the printing system,
that part of the OS,
putting up controls in the print dialog,
you have applications potentially
doing it by installing their own PDEs,
and you have the printer modules
registering their own PDEs.
We're going to do all the basic,
what we call universal
features in our PDEs,
so copies and page range
fall into that category.
We're also, after DP4,
but before we ship the first release,
going to add these plugins to support
PPD features for PostScript printers.
And we're going to be looking to the
printer vendors using this SDK to
write these plugins for their features.
We categorize these features
using some terminology,
which I might as well mention now.
Universal applies to features
which you always get,
regardless of what you're printing to,
and copies and page
range are good examples.
Standard features,
features like quality mode,
if you've got a printer that
supports best mode or draft mode,
etc.
Different printers want to
implement quality mode using
a different style of print.
So, because there isn't a standard
way of presenting that,
we would expect the printer vendors
to develop those panels for what
we call these standard features.
Then applications can add their PDEs for
what we might call custom features.
So, for example,
with this presentation package,
if you wanted to print out slides, notes,
and handouts, you'd expect to see a panel
loaded for that application's
custom features at print time.
And then last but not least,
the printer vendors are going to use
this SDK to develop those panels.
So, we're going to be looking at
the different types of features.
So, the printer vendors are going to
be writing PDEs for their unique
features for their printers.
So, Apple's going to be
taking care of PostScript,
and the printer vendors are
going to be writing PDEs for
their non-PostScript printers.
Printer modules and PDEs are
mandatory to hook a printer up
to 10 and be able to print to it.
I/O modules and their counterpart,
which is on the next slide,
those we're hoping that printer
vendors and other developers really
don't have to spend a lot of time on,
because it's our intent to support
the mainstream print protocols.
In DP4, we've got I/O modules which
handle printing over LPR.
AppleTalk with Pap, we can send
[Transcript missing]
If you're using a printer
connected up to Mac OS X,
and for example it has an interface
that we haven't supported,
then you should talk to us before you
go ahead and write an I/O module for it.
Because we'd like to help you.
But there will be cases
where you have a proprietary
interface maybe to your printer.
If that's the case, then the SDK,
through the SDK,
we will provide sample code for
you writing your own I/O modules.
And I mentioned a couple there
that possibly Apple would do,
SCSI and IRDA,
but it's not high on our priority list.
The last is printer browser modules.
These are, to I/O modules,
what print dialog extensions
were to printer modules.
I/O modules have no UI.
If you want to find a printer
on a particular connection type,
Print Center loads a printer
browser module to give you the user
interface for the discovery process.
So we have, for example, in DP4,
we've got a printer browser module so
that you can set up an LPR printer.
And as you probably know,
LPR is not a BiDi connection.
So the user interface for LPR is that you
type in the IP address of the printer.
We have another one that Alan showed,
NBP,
that's the AppleTalk discovery protocol.
So we have a printer browser module.
We have a printer browser module for
connecting to AppleTalk printers.
Netinfo,
which you're probably familiar with,
which is a directory service,
we have a printer browser
module so you can find printers
in the Netinfo database.
And last, and of course not least,
is USB, and you can find
printers on your USB bus.
So in due course,
we'll have a printer browser
module for FireWire printers.
Another one on our list is SLP,
Service Location Protocol.
Again, it's not in DP4,
it's likely not going to
be in the first release,
but it's becoming quite a popular
IP-based discovery protocol.
And as people move more and
more towards IP-only networks,
we'll add SLP to enable you
to find SLP-savvy printers.
And just like you might have to
write your own custom I/O modules,
if you were to do so,
you'd be writing a printer browser
module to go along with it.
The print dialog extensions, I/O modules,
and these printer browser modules,
these are all part of
the so-called Tioga SDK.
The SDK is focused right now
on the printer modules and
the print dialog extensions.
It's coming out next week, and as I said,
if you're not already talking to us,
you should be.
I could say how great this SDK is,
but actually we've been working
with some of the main people in the
printing business for the last year.
In fact, a year ago next week,
we got together with them
and started the collaborative
effort of creating this SDK.
And we've been making some pretty
good progress over the last year.
They've been very helpful, supportive,
and patient with us.
And so we thought that we would
get some of these guys who've been
collaborating with us to come up
here and just tell you what their
plans are for supporting Tioga on X.
And I'm going to hand over to
John now to make those introductions.
Thank you, Paul.
As Paul mentioned,
we have been working with developers.
We have not been designing
this in a black box.
We have been taking feedback.
And we've been very lucky that we've
actually worked very closely with
some of the key printer developers out
there to get some very good feedback.
And the results have
been extremely positive.
So I'd like to first introduce
I'll introduce the three
that we have reps today.
I'll first off with Rick Spillers from
HeLa Packard to talk about where they're
going with Mac OS X and their printers.
Rick.
Hi everybody,
I'm very glad to be here and I just
want to say that I'm part of a small
team inside Hewlett Packard that's
focused exclusively on the Mac market
across all of our product lines.
It includes our large format design jets,
our laser jets, and especially our award
winning desk jet printers.
Since the iMac first
introduced a few years ago,
we've been working real closely
with Apple on an R&D level,
and especially in the last year,
as Paul says,
our software engineering teams have
been working with Apple to make sure
we're on track with OS X development.
And that's been working out very well.
And we have some very hardworking--
Mac-focused software engineers,
many of whom are in the room right now on
our quality assurance team that's working
real closely with Apple to make sure our
OS X drivers work well and we're ready to
ship things in the box as OS X develops.
We're very excited
inside HP about Mac OS X,
and it's really raising some eyebrows
inside HP with all of our Wintel folks,
so it's really interesting to watch
that from the Mac perspective.
I also want to ask that,
from a developer standpoint,
as you develop your products for OS X,
you think about HP,
and to help you do that,
HP has a website, hp.com/go/solutions,
where you can sign up on a couple of
different levels to get HP products to
test with for your OS X development,
and also to get HP products to use at
trade show demos and things like that.
So that's available to you,
hp.com/go/solutions.
And in closing,
I just want to say that we're very
excited to be working with Apple.
I think OS X is going to be really hot,
and we're working hard to make
sure we have OS X drivers that
are going to ship in the box with
our printers as things roll on.
So thank you.
Thank you, Rick.
Next, I would like to go ahead
and introduce from Epson,
Mitch Kadish.
Thank you, John.
It's great to be here.
The relationship that Epson shares with
Apple is a very important one for us,
and it's also been a continuous one,
even through the tough period that
Apple went through a few years ago.
As you probably know,
when the iMac was introduced,
Epson was there with
the first USB printer,
and we continued our innovation
last year by introducing
the first FireWire printer.
We're very excited about
working with Apple on OS X,
and you can be sure that when it ships,
our drivers will be there fully
supporting all the printing
features in the operating system.
And we're especially excited about the
Tioga architecture and how we think
it will help drive high-resolution
printing forward into the future.
Thank you.
And finally,
we have a representative from Canon to
talk about their directions and how
they're getting involved with Mac OS X,
Robert Shibata.
Hi, I'm Robert Shibata.
I'm a representative
from Canon here today.
And I just wanted to let you
know that Canon is the largest
printer manufacturer in the world.
And we are definitely behind Apple.
As you know,
we have a lot of products that
are supporting the Apple platform.
And actually going back in history,
we've actually been working with
Apple for well over 10 years,
going back to the LaserWriters
and the StyleWriters.
And more recently, with products that are
supporting the Apple platform,
we have obviously printers, scanners,
MFPs, a full line of products.
Back at the keynote in January,
Steve Jobs actually held up one
of our USB-powered scanners and
said something to the effect that,
"Oh, this is a really neat
old product," I think.
So, um...
Actually, I did,
I promised I wouldn't do too
much sales type stuff here today,
but I just wanted to show our,
our little portable we have.
So this is the BJC85,
and it is actually the thinnest
and lightest notebook product
for the Apple platform.
And as you can see,
it's actually a perfect
partner for a PowerBook.
So those of you who may
have PowerBooks or know
somebody that has a PowerBook,
you know, just keep this product in mind.
And speaking about,
speaking about miniaturization,
we actually have the smallest
MFP for the Apple platform,
you know, in addition.
But not to talk about
too much of our products,
I didn't want to take
too much of your time,
is that we do have a
full line of products.
And we actually just
shipped a photo printer,
which is called the BJC8200,
which actually has the smallest
picoliter dot on the market.
And, um, Well, anyways, Anyways,
just to say that our developers
back in Japan have really been
working very closely with,
uh, with, uh,
Paul Danbold and the printer
team to really support the
current operating system as
well as going future with OSX10.
So, um, OSX, excuse me.
So, um,
we really look forward to this new
operating system with a lot of the power,
the multi-functionality with
this new operating system.
So, thanks very much.
Thank you.
Just to let you know,
operators are standing by.
Thank you.
So as you can see,
we've actually been working with three
of the bigger companies out there.
We have been working with
other developers as well.
And it's been a very
interesting experience,
because normally you think of the big
companies out on the market as against
each other and almost a cutthroat.
And it's an amazing experience to
get all three of them in the same
room and actually cooperating and
giving us ideas on how we can make
the operating system move forward.
So we are very excited
to be working with them,
as well as working with
other companies as well.
So, to wrap up the session and where
you should be going forward,
We first recommend that
after this session,
in addition to going to the
sessions this afternoon,
go back and take a look
at the documentation.
You'll find some documentation
up on the website,
developer.apple.com/techpubs/carbon/mult
imediacarbonprintingmanager.
Take a look at the documentation
and get more in depth with it.
In addition,
start using Carbon in your applications.
As you're porting your
applications to Carbon,
use the Carbon printing APIs.
And finally,
we have an email address that you can
send us feedback of your experiences,
let us know what we're doing right,
let us know what we're doing wrong.
And that's at
macosx-dev-feedback@apple.com